Last updated: by Hayden on Oct. 17, 2025

This code is for simulating a tissue via a vertex model with dynamic tensions on edges.

For a description of the vertex model itself, see Meryl Spencer's PhD thesis and see Avik Mondal's PhD thesis for an update on evolving the box size.

The base class files are TissueClass, VertexClass, VectClass, EdgeClass, CellClass, (and constants Constants.h).

The sub class files are AGCell, AGTissue, (and constants AGConstants.h). These include, most notably, Avik's update to box size evolution.

The sub sub class files are DynamicTissue, DynamicEdge, (and constants Dynamic Constants.h).

For equations for current dynamic tensions model, see Staddon et al. Biophysical Journal 2019. 
[Eq. 4 and the equation for tension in the accompanying paragraph]
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006349519308148

There are two main functions -- MainTest.cpp and DynamicMain.cpp. 
MainTest.cpp is for simulating the AGVertexModel with constant edge tensions. 
DynamicMain.cpp is for simulating the DynamicTissue model (with non-constant edge tensions). This uses (as an initial condition) packings generated by running AGVertexModel.
You will need to edit one line in each main function to specify the directory where your input files are.

MATLABvis a directory that includes MATLAB code for visualizing results of the simulations. This includes visualization of tensions on edges. This includes a subdirectory with helper functions for the visualization.
Pass CreateMovie the _out.txt file and a flag of 0 or 1 (which determines whether the colorbar for dynamic tension is scaled based on the min and max tension across the whole movie -- or just the min and max at the final timepoint).

I also included an example voronoi-tesselated initial condition to run with AGVertexModel and also included an example initial condition for DynamicTissue. See directory input_files. mytissue_voro.txt is for AGVertexModel, while mytissue_voro_relax.txt is for DynamicTissue.

I also included a directory with other relevant readme files -- see other_relevant_documentation.

See below for instructions for compiling with clang on mac and then running the executable:

For AGVertexModel model, see:
clang++ -std=c++11 -c AGCell.cpp -o AGCell.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c AGTissue.cpp -o AGTissue.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c CellClass.cpp -o CellClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c EdgeClass.cpp -o EdgeClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c MainTest.cpp -o MainTest.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c TissueClass.cpp -o TissueClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c VectClass.cpp -o VectClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c VertexClass.cpp -o VertexClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 MainTest.o AGCell.o AGTissue.o CellClass.o EdgeClass.o TissueClass.o VectClass.o VertexClass.o -o my_program_AG

./my_program_AG


For DynamicTissue model, see:
clang++ -std=c++11 -c AGCell.cpp -o AGCell.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c AGTissue.cpp -o AGTissue.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c CellClass.cpp -o CellClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c DynamicEdge.cpp -o DynamicEdge.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c DynamicMain.cpp -o DynamicMain.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c DynamicTissue.cpp -o DynamicTissue.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c EdgeClass.cpp -o EdgeClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c TissueClass.cpp -o TissueClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c VectClass.cpp -o VectClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 -c VertexClass.cpp -o VertexClass.o

clang++ -std=c++11 DynamicMain.o AGCell.o AGTissue.o CellClass.o DynamicEdge.o DynamicTissue.o EdgeClass.o TissueClass.o VectClass.o VertexClass.o -o my_program_Dyn

./my_program_Dyn


See below for notes on current state of code:

	1. // check various L0s
	I don't think it is a bug, but there seems to be a bit of redundancy built into storage of rest lengths. Why L0 and currentRestLength? I think you may only need three of these four.
	L0- Edge rest length attribute given to each dynamic edge
	currentRestLength- Used during integration, this is where the current edge rest length is stored
	restLengthOld- Used during edge length integration, this is where the rest length before an integration step is stored
	restLengthNew- Used during edge length integration, this is where the future rest length from the integration is stored

	2. // is apoptosis called? -- weird issue with this -- APOPTOSISON not doing anything
	Apoptosis is not currently used, but the way the code around it is handled is a bit sloppy.

	3. // BE CAREFUL WITH T1 and Resolve
	// MAKE SURE base class CreateEdge!! is never called -- in HelperMitosis, HelperResolveVertices_UpdatePtrs/HelperResolveVertices_UpdatePtrs
	// If you call from Resolve, will make a regular Edge, not a dynamic Edge!
	// bug in Resolve?? -- check later -- maybe just write own version of ResolveVertices -- but what to pass as saved rest length and saved tension?
	// check helperT1removeedge, HelperResolveVertices_UpdatePtrs
	// HelperResolveVertices_ResolveFourfoldVertex
	The basic problem is that the Evolve function DynamicTissue calls (*this).ResolveVertices(errorfile); -- which calls the function in the Tissue Class, which then calls the Tissue Class version of (*this).HelperResolveVertices_ResolveFourfoldVertex(fourfoldresolved[i]).
	This has the potential of creating base class edges rather than DynamicEdges. It has not done that in any simulations I have run -- but it should result in obvious bugs -- since a base class edge does not have rest length!
	
	4. // removed the dt? from IntegrateEuiler -- make sure that code is not using Euiler! -- bug in Euiler!
	// I think there was a bug in my original RK4 Helper? that I fixed here
	// SavedInfoForEvolve_MechForce or SavedInfoForEvolve_TotalForce? -> Fix in AGTISSUE
	IntegrateEuiler in Dynamic Tensons has a bug -- not an issue for now since not being used.

	See RK4Helper_EuilerStep. Only the mech force -- not including boundary computations was being used (also see corresponding code in AGTissue) -- was being used to update vertex positions. Now total force see.
	for (list<Vertex*>::iterator vit = vertices.begin(); vit != vertices.end(); vit++) {
		//(*(*vit)).rnew = (*(*vit)).SavedInfoForEvolve_MechForce * (dt / alphaM);
		(*(*vit)).rnew = (*(*vit)).SavedInfoForEvolve_TotalForce * (dt / alphaM);
	}
	

	5. omp.h
	I commented out the include omp.h lines because I did not need it for the runs I am doing and it was causing annoying compilation issues. If you want to use, uncomment the include statement in the top of the relevant functions.
